Some people believe that success in life comes from taking risks or chances. Others believe　that success results from careful planning. In your opinion, what does success come from? Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer.

The question about what success comes from has been so much debated in our society. Some may think that careful planning contributes to success. Traditionally, young people turn to successful people for guidance because young people believe that they can make excellent achievements through careful planning. Today, this view might be reversed. More and more people are taking a fresh look at it. Based on hardworking, they prefer taking risks rather than　simply careful planning.

The most persuasive argument is that people taking risks or chances are more likely to succeed than the others. Risks or chances are not questions that people who disagree with the point can shrug off lightly. With the advent of advanced international communication, a great number of opportunities will be faced by which the traditional careful planning is threatened. The difference between the two opinions is courage to challenge yourself. Actually, the only one step in the gap is not boundly conquered at all, in most cases, which prevents too many cowards from succeeding at last. People being short of bravery---if they are prepared to admit it---could learn one or two from the brave ones who actually not only have courage but also are wise and confident. One of the biggest lessons they should learn is how to plunk up your courage. The resource from which courage comes is nothing more than experience. It is hardly possible to　decide whether to take a risk in front of some important affairs without any experience. To gain　experience, one of the most necessary approaches for you is to learn how to analyze and sum up　what you have done no matter you won or lost. As an old saying goes, “Failures teach success.” Confidence is the basis to your goal. Never give up solid aims in life and encourage yourself from time to time as Abraham Lincoln once said, “ I will prepare and some day my chance will come.” Finally, taking risks or chances can be regarded as a break with tradition. The emphasis on the challenge has been exactly expected because it surely helps people succeed avoiding wasting time. No other reasonable solution in intensive completion provides many opportunities to　accomplish your object in life .

From the above what I have discussed, we can draw a conclusion that superficially, careful planning is a sound solution, but when we weigh in mind attentively, we find that taking risks or chances is more necessary to success.

