A person you know is planning to move to your town or city. What do you think this person would like and dislike about living in your town or city? Why? Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer. 

If a person I know is planning to move to my city, what this person would like and dislike about　living in my city? It is an interesting question for me. Frankly speaking, living im my city - Taipei　for a long time, I never thought of such a question before I started to write this essay. In my point of view, there are many good sites about this city and my friend will enjoy living here.

First, Taipei is a city where there are lots of job opportunities. Job opportunities is very important when　an outsider wants to start a new life in a city. Taipei, as everybody knows, has many factories, companies and international headquaters. With a superior urban environment and infrastructure, Taipei not only attracted many foreign institutions, but also many domestic investors to set their　offices and build their factories here. Therefore, you can find many job vacancies on the web or in newspapers in Taipei.

Second, Taipei is a place where you can learn what you want to learn. There are so many colleges, schools, and training classes in Taipei. The learning opportunities are available all year round. If you want to learn English composition, there are a lot of schools and classes for you to choose from. If you want to learn dancing, you can join one of many dancing clubs in the park, where teachers teach people dancing for free.

Last but not least, you never feel bored in Taipei. There are so many places where you can go, and so many activities that you can do. When you get up in the morning, you can go to the nearest　coffee shop and enjoy drinking a cup of coffee. Or you can choose to eat Chinese food. There is always a variety of things for you to choose from. If you feel upset, you can go to a night pub, listening to some tender music.

Take what I have mentioned above into consideration, living in my home town is a great pleasure. I think my friend will like living in my hometown.

