Do you agree or disagree with the following statement? Telephones and email have made　communication between people less personal. Use specific reasons and examples to support your answer.

At first glance, this statement may sound plausible because except for personal contact, every other form of communication, including telephones and emails, are indirect ways of communication. But shall we get a conclusion that telephones and email have made communication between people less personal? To answer this question, we should look at the　following points:

First, telephone and email are more efficient ways of communication. Telephones and email are becoming more and more important for us today. We use telephones for conversations with our friends and family; we use email to transfer important information and documents, even photo and multimedia files. With a phone, we can order services and make enquiries regarding a service without being physically present in the place, this will save us so much time and energy. In times of emergencies, when it is impossible for us to physically go to a police station or a hospital, we can simply call 911, an emergency vehicle will come to us in ten minutes. Imagine how hard it will be　for us if we do not have access to a telephone under emergency situations.

Second, telephones and email increase the chances that people communicate. Although face-to-face personal contact is more close and intimate than making phone calls or sending emails, we actually do not have much time to visit each other. Furthermore, people have their own private life. Sometimes they do not want to be disturbed by visitors. A phone call or an email message is always the most proper and courteous way to make contact with people, and are not restrained by time or occasions. For example, during the Chinese New Years, more and more people make　phone calls to our friends and folks, or send electronic cards through email, wishing them a happy new year, instead of actually travel to their friends’ house to make a visit.

In conclusion, telephones and email are convenient ways to communicate and can actually increase the communication between people. They may be less personal, but they are surely more effective means of communication.
