F1 circuits could withdraw from rescheduled 2020 calendar due to fallout from coronavirus pandemic

FIA president Jean Todt has issued a warning that Formula 1 circuits may pull out from the rescheduled 2020 calendar due to the impact of the coronavirus pandemic. As F1 owners Liberty Media continue to negotiate how the new season will be structured once motorsport can resume, there are concerns that some events may not take place due to the ongoing fallout from the pandemic.

The goal is to create a 2020 calendar of up to 18 races once lockdown restrictions are lifted. However, Todt has expressed concerns that race promoters may not be willing to host events that could be perceived as "a celebration" given the current global circumstances. He also suggested that fans may not want to attend mass-gathering events for the foreseeable future due to the risks involved.

In an interview, Todt stated that "The problem is that we have events which are organised and there are contracts. But there are also promoters who are suffering and we have to be supportive to them. We have seen some promoters who said, 'we will not organise a race because we cannot afford it'."

He added that the situation was "very complicated" and that it would require "a lot of work" to find solutions. Todt also suggested that one option would be to create a more regionalised calendar, which would limit travel and reduce the risk of exposure to the virus.

The pandemic has had a significant impact on the world of motorsport, with several races already cancelled or postponed. The 2020 season has yet to start, with the Australian Grand Prix being called off just hours before the first practice session was due to begin. The Monaco Grand Prix has also been cancelled, while other events have been postponed or rescheduled.

Formula 1 has been working hard to find ways to ensure that the season can go ahead in a safe and responsible way, but there are still many uncertainties. With the possibility of some events being cancelled, it remains to be seen what the final calendar will look like once the season gets underway.

In conclusion, the FIA president's warning highlights the challenges facing Formula 1 as it attempts to navigate the fallout from the coronavirus pandemic. While Liberty Media continues to work on putting together a 2020 calendar, there are concerns that some events may not take place due to the ongoing impact of the pandemic. The situation remains fluid, and it will be interesting to see how it develops in the coming weeks and months.


