2015 Smashes Record for Hottest Year, Final Figures Confirm

The latest data from the Met Office, Nasa, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has confirmed that 2015 was the hottest year on record since measurements began in 1850. The data revealed that the average global temperature in 2015 was 0.75C above the long-term average for the years between 1961 and 1990, breaking the previous record set in 2014. Experts say that the high temperatures, mainly caused by human activity, are pushing the world into “uncharted territory” and making climate change more dangerous.

The data, released on Wednesday, follows similar findings by the UK Met Office in December, which indicated that 2015 was on track to break the record. The NOAA and NASA confirmed these preliminary findings, stating that the 2015 record was a result of a combination of long-term warming caused by greenhouse gases and a strong El Niño event in the Pacific. El Niño is a natural phenomenon that occurs every few years, but the current El Niño is one of the strongest ever recorded, and has been linked to several extreme weather events around the world, including floods and droughts.

The record-breaking temperatures seen in 2015 have raised concerns among scientists, who warn that they are a clear indication of the impact of human activity on the planet. The Met Office’s chief scientist, Professor Dame Julia Slingo, said that the high temperatures “should be a wake-up call” to the world. “We have seen a series of record-breaking events in the past year, from heatwaves in India to flooding in the UK,” she said. “All the evidence points to the fact that human activity is playing a key role in these events, and that we need to take urgent action to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to the changing climate.”

Climate change experts have also warned that the record temperatures are pushing the world into “uncharted territory,” with potentially disastrous consequences. “We are moving into a new era of climate change, one that is more dangerous and unpredictable than anything we have experienced before,” said Dr. Ed Hawkins, a climate scientist at the University of Reading. “The record-breaking temperatures of the past year are a clear indication that we need to act now to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions, before it’s too late.”

The latest data has also raised concerns about the potential impact of climate change on the world’s most vulnerable communities. The UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has warned that rising temperatures and sea levels could lead to widespread displacement of people, as well as food and water shortages. “The impact of climate change is not just an environmental issue, it’s a human rights issue,” said Kumi Naidoo, executive director of Greenpeace International. “The world’s most vulnerable people are already feeling the effects of climate change, and unless we take urgent action, the situation will only get worse.”

The Met Office has also warned that 2016 is likely to set a new record for global temperatures, meaning that temperature records will have been broken for three consecutive years. “There is no doubt that we are seeing a long-term trend of rising temperatures, and that trend is only going to continue unless we take decisive action to tackle climate change,” said Professor Slingo. “We need to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions, invest in renewable energy, and adapt to the changing climate. It’s time to act, before it’s too late.”


