Richard Scudamore says Premier League is 'not a charity' following £5bn TV deal
? Sky Sports and BT Sport have paid £5.136bn to secure Premier League TV rights from 2016-19 
? Sky have bought five of the seven packages to retain stranglehold 
? The deal means each game will cost a staggering £10.2m
? Richard Scudamore defended the Premier League as an instution
Richard Scudamore has insisted the Premier League is a success story but not a charity, after criticism on the record £5bn TV deal announced on Tuesday.

Football pundits, including Sportsmail's Jamie Carragher and Match of the Day host Gary Lineker, have called for ticket prices to be reduced and improvements made to grassroots football following the record-breaking deal.

However, speaking to BBC Radio 5 live, Premier League Chief executive Scudamore said: 'We're not set up for charitable purposes. We are set up to be the best football competition.' 

Labour's shadow sports minister Clive Efford claimed it would be 'nothing short of criminal' if money was not invested into grassroots football while Sports minister Helen Grant called for clubs to be run 'responsibly and sustainably'.

Scudamore described England's top-flight as a British institution in the wake of Sky and BT Sport combining to hike up the Premier League's British screening costs by 70 per cent in a new deal to run from 2016 to 2019.

Three years ago the rights were sold for a combined total of £3.018billion, an average of £6.53m per game.

Sky has almost doubled its investment to retain five of seven packages, including the new Friday night slot, with the Premier League set to net around £113,000 a minute from domestic television revenue. 

Chief executive Scudamore believes the Premier League is as much loved across the globe as the BBC and the Royal Family, asserting the competition's right to sell to the highest bidder despite the astronomical sums.

'To my core, I believe this is a success story,' said Scudamore. 'And I believe it's a great UK export, it attracts a whole lot of positive feelings about the UK.

'If you go and do any international survey, things like the Premier League, the BBC, the Queen: they are things that people feel are good about the UK.

'Our own Prime Minister is quite happy to travel the world and talk about what a good thing the Premier League is.

'And we're proud that our clubs and the league is looked at in that way.

'If you had your house and you were about to sell it tomorrow you would probably want to sell it for as much as someone was willing to pay for it.

'We have an asset here, clearly it's an asset that people value, and we've marketed it in a way and put it up for sale and people have paid what they've paid for it.' 

Sky will pay £4.176billion for the lion's share of the rights including the coveted Sunday evening slot, while BT Sport will pay £960million. BT Sport will have the Saturday evening package, however, instead of the Saturday lunchtime slot.

Boss Scudamore admitted Premier League bosses felt the meteoric rise in revenues would prove unsustainable the last time rights were sold, in 2012.

The Premier League will spend the majority of 2015 selling the competition's new global television rights, and the overall revenue could spiral beyond £8billion.

The League remains confident this latest rights deal will not be derailed by Virgin Media's ongoing complaint with broadcast regulator Ofcom. 

The soaring cost of Premier League football rights put the skids under Sky shares on Wednesday.

Shares in both Sky and BT Sport have risen sharply in recent weeks but Sky was down 5% after the result of the auction was disclosed.

BT shares, which have been at a 14-year high, rose 4% as it was seen as having secured the better deal. Sky shares hit a record high earlier this year.

Sky admits that the price paid per year is around £330 million more than City analysts had forecast but insists it has plans in place to fund the bid.

It pledged to minimise the impact of higher rights costs on customers, with the majority of the funding for the new deal coming through efficiency plans.

Chief executive Jeremy Darroch said: 'This is a good result and confirms that Sky is the unrivalled choice for sports fans.

'We went into the Premier League auction with a clear objective and are pleased to have secured the rights that we wanted.'

BT said its deal would cost it £7.6 million per game, an increase of 18% on the £6.5 million per game it currently pays.

However, it pointed out that the launch of BT Sport has supported the financial performance of the company by attracting new customers and encouraging existing customers to take more BT products.

Richard Hunter, head of equities at Hargreaves Lansdown, said BT appeared to have got the better deal following an expensive rights auction.

He said: 'Sky has paid dearly and is going to have to squeeze costs and customers to keep its finances on track.

'BT has ended up with a good hand, Premiership, Champions League, FA Cup and European leagues all for a fraction of the annual cost that Sky is paying for its Premiership position.' 

